[docs] [doc audit] Tutorial: Create a module with a config plugin (#33162)
expo/expo: docs/pages/modules/config-plugin-and-native-module-tutorial.mdx

description: A tutorial on creating a native module with a config plugin using Expo modules API.
---

import { Grid01Icon } from '@expo/styleguide-icons/outline/Grid01Icon';

import { BoxLink } from '~/ui/components/BoxLink';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';

> Config plugins let you customize native Android and iOS projects generated with `npx expo prebuild`. You can use them to add properties to native config files, copy assets to native projects, or apply advanced configurations, such as adding an app extension target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Config plugins let you customize native Android and iOS projects generated with `npx expo prebuild`. You can use them to add properties to native config files, copy assets to native projects, or apply advanced configurations, such as adding an [app extension target](/build-reference/app-extensions/).
```

Let's add an internal link on the app extensions target.

As an app developer, config plugins help you apply customizations not exposed in the default [app config](/workflow/configuration). As a library author, they enable you to configure native projects automatically for developers using your library.

> This guide explains how to create a new config plugin from scratch and read custom values that your plugin injects into **AndroidManifest.xml** and **Info.plist** from an Expo module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial explains how to create a new config plugin from scratch and read custom values that your plugin injects into **AndroidManifest.xml** and **Info.plist** from an Expo module.
```

}
```

</Step>

<Step label="3">

## Run the example project

> Start the TypeScript compiler to watch for changes and rebuild the module's JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the root of your project, run the TypeScript compiler to watch for changes and rebuild the module's JavaScript:
```

  ]}
/>

You should see a screen with the text "API key: api-key".

</Step>

<Step label="4">

> ## Creating a new config plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create a new config plugin
```

> Start developing your new config plugin. Plugins are synchronous functions that accept an `ExpoConfig` and return a modified `ExpoConfig`. By convention, these functions are prefixed with the word `with`. Name your plugin `withMyApiKey` or use a different name, as long as it follows this convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins are synchronous functions that accept an `ExpoConfig` and return a modified `ExpoConfig`. By convention, these functions are prefixed with the word `with`. Name your plugin `withMyApiKey` or use a different name, as long as it follows this convention.
```

Let's omit the first line since the last line in this section adds the context for the user-facing actionable steps. A concept is being explained here, so let's not mix the two different content types.

Here is an example of a basic config plugin function:

```js
const withMyApiKey = config => {
  return config;
};
```

You can also use `mods`, which are async functions that modify files in native projects, such as source code or configuration files (plist, xml). The `mods` object is different from the rest of the app config because it doesn't serialize after the initial reading. This allows you to perform actions _during_ code generation.

When writing config plugins, follow these considerations:

- Plugins must be synchronous, and their return value must be serializable, except for any `mods` that are added.

> - `plugins` are invoked whenever the `expo/config` method `getConfig` reads the config. In contrast, `mods` are invoked only during the "syncing" phase of `npx expo prebuild`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `plugins` are invoked whenever the `getConfig` method from `expo/config` reads the configuration. In contrast, `mods` are invoked only during the "syncing" phase of `npx expo prebuild`.
```

Let's rephrase to add clarity.

> Although optional, use [`expo-module-scripts`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/expo-module-scripts) to simplify plugin development. It provides a recommended default configuration for TypeScript and Jest. For more information, see the [config plugins guide](https://github.com/expo/expo/tree/main/packages/expo-module-scripts#-config-plugin).

> Start creating your plugin with this minimal boilerplate. Create a **plugin** folder for writing the plugin in TypeScript and add an **app.plugin.js** file in the project root as the plugin's entry point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start creating your plugin with this minimal boilerplate. Create a **plugin** folder for writing the plugin in TypeScript and add an **app.plugin.js** file in the project root, which will be the plugin's entry point.
```

> ### Create a **plugin/tsconfig.json** file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a plugin/tsconfig.json file
```

No affect of having file names bold when the content is rendered. So let's remove them from section headings.

```json plugin/tsconfig.json
{
  "extends": "expo-module-scripts/tsconfig.plugin",
  "compilerOptions": {
    "outDir": "build",
    "rootDir": "src"
  },
  "include": ["./src"],
  "exclude": ["**/__mocks__/*", "**/__tests__/*"]
}
```

> ### Create a **plugin/src/index.ts** file for your plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a plugin/src/index.ts file for your plugin
```

No need to add `:` in section headings.

```ts plugin/src/index.ts
import { ConfigPlugin } from 'expo/config-plugins';

const withMyApiKey: ConfigPlugin = config => {
  console.log('my custom plugin');
  return config;
};

export default withMyApiKey;
```

### Create an **app.plugin.js** file in the root directory:

```js app.plugin.js
// This file configures the entry file for your plugin.
module.exports = require('./plugin/build');
```

> At the root of your project, run `npm run build plugin` to start the TypeScript compiler in watch mode. Next, configure your example project to use your plugin by adding the following line to the **example/app.json** file:

Reviewer: Is the `plugin` part of the command? We never mention this before in this tutorial.

Reviewer: Did you find out if this is a valid flag for this command? When I create an example project, I do not see the command being mentioned in the plugin's directory (maybe my understanding is wrong here):

![CleanShot 2024-11-26 at 17 32 42@2x](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/015e0596-f95e-4231-908e-950949d80285)

}
```

> When you run `npx expo prebuild` inside your **example** folder, you see your 'my custom plugin' console.log statement in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you run `npx expo prebuild` command inside your **example** directory, you will see "my custom plugin" logged by console statement in the terminal.
```

- Directory over folder as per our writing style guide.
- No single quotes. Let's stick to one pattern (we use double quotes) for concistency.

<Terminal cmd={['$ cd example', '$ npx expo prebuild --clean']} />

To inject your custom API keys into **AndroidManifest.xml** and **Info.plist**, use helper [`mods` provided by `expo/config-plugins`](/config-plugins/plugins-and-mods/#what-are-mods). These make it easy to modify native files. For this example, use `withAndroidManifest` and `withInfoPlist`.

> As the name suggests, `withInfoPlist` allows you to read and modify **Info.plist** values. Using the `modResults` property, you can add custom values as shown in the code snippet below:

Reviewer: Can we move this iOS section after the Android one for platform order consistency as per the writing style guide?

}
```

When you run the `npx expo prebuild` command inside your **example** directory, the terminal logs "my custom plugin" through a console statement.

<Terminal cmd={['$ cd example', '$ npx expo prebuild --clean']} />

To inject your custom API keys into **AndroidManifest.xml** and **Info.plist**, use helper [`mods` provided by `expo/config-plugins`](/config-plugins/plugins-and-mods/#what-are-mods). These make it easy to modify native files. For this example, use `withAndroidManifest` and `withInfoPlist`.

As the name suggests, `withAndroidManifest` allows you to read and modify the **AndroidManifest.xml** file. Use `AndroidConfig` helpers to add a metadata item to the main application, as shown below:

```ts
const withMyApiKey: ConfigPlugin<{ apiKey: string }> = (config, { apiKey }) => {
  config = withAndroidManifest(config, config => {
    const mainApplication = AndroidConfig.Manifest.getMainApplicationOrThrow(config.modResults);

    AndroidConfig.Manifest.addMetaDataItemToMainApplication(
      mainApplication,
      'MY_CUSTOM_API_KEY',
      apiKey
    );
    return config;
  });

  return config;
};
```

> Similartly, you can use `withInfoPlist` to modify the **Info.plist** values. Using the `modResults` property, you can add custom values as shown in the code snippet below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, you can use `withInfoPlist` to modify the **Info.plist** values. Using the `modResults` property, you can add custom values as shown in the code snippet below:
```

export default withMyApiKey;
```

> With the plugin ready to use, update the example app to pass your API key to the plugin as a configuration option. Modify the `"plugins"` field in **example/app.json** as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the plugin ready to use, update the example app to pass your API key to the plugin as a configuration option. Modify the `plugins` field in **example/app.json** as shown below:
```

}
```

> After making this change, test that the plugin works correctly by running `npx expo prebuild --clean` inside the **example** folder. This command executes your plugin and updates native files, injecting "MY_CUSTOM_API_KEY" into **AndroidManifest.xml** and **Info.plist**. Verify this by checking the contents of **example/android/app/src/main/AndroidManifest.xml**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After making this change, test that the plugin works correctly by running `npx expo prebuild --clean` inside the **example** directory. This command executes your plugin and updates native files, injecting `"MY_CUSTOM_API_KEY"` into **AndroidManifest.xml** and **Info.plist**. You can verify this by checking the contents of **example/android/app/src/main/AndroidManifest.xml**.
```

- Directory over folder as per our writing style guide.

</Step>

<Step label="5">

## Reading native values from the module

> Make your native module read the fields added to **AndroidManifest.xml** and **Info.plist** by using platform-specific methods to access their contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, make your native module read the fields added to **AndroidManifest.xml** and **Info.plist** by using platform-specific methods to access their contents.
```

}
```

On iOS, you can read the content of an **Info.plist** property using the `Bundle.main.object(forInfoDictionaryKey: "")` method. To access the `"MY_CUSTOM_API_KEY"` value added earlier, update the **ios/ExpoNativeConfigurationModule.swift** file as shown:

```swift ios/ExpoNativeConfigurationModule.swift
import ExpoModulesCore

public class ExpoNativeConfigurationModule: Module {
  public func definition() -> ModuleDefinition {
    Name("ExpoNativeConfiguration")

    Function("getApiKey") {
     return Bundle.main.object(forInfoDictionaryKey: "MY_CUSTOM_API_KEY") as? String
    }
  }
}
```

</Step>

<Step label="6">

> ## Running your module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run your module
```

With your native modules reading the fields added to the native files, you can now run the example app and access your custom API key using the `ExamplePlugin.getApiKey()` function.

<Terminal
  cmdCopy="cd example && npx expo run:ios"
  cmd={[
    '$ cd example',
    '# execute our plugin and update native files',
    '$ npx expo prebuild',
    '# Run the example app on Android',
    '$ npx expo run:android',
    '# Run the example app on iOS',
    '$ npx expo run:ios',
  ]}
/>

</Step>

## Next steps

Congratulations, you have created a config plugin that interacts with an Expo module for Android and iOS!

If you want to challenge yourself and make the plugin more versatile, this exercise is open for you. Modify the plugin to allow any arbitrary set of config keys and values to be passed in, and add functionality to read arbitrary keys from the module.

<BoxLink
  title="Expo Modules API Reference"

>   description="Create native modules using Kotlin and Swift."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description="A reference to create native modules using Kotlin and Swift."
```

The description wasn't self explanatory so let's add the context about the it being a reference.
